Hold down the left mouse button and explore the screen with your cursor. Use the left and right arrow keys to navigate between pages. Use Alt-F4 or Cmd+Q to exit.<p>Supergiant Games' "Bastion" creates meaningful play through its tight control, variety of play, compelling story and innovative use of reactive narration. Through a unique blend of literary and gameplay elements, "Bastion" creates suspense, raises questions, and delivers satisfying payoff, driving the player to continue to play. The variety of gameplay makes for a satisfying experience well beyond a first playthrough, and the cohesive setting creates an immersive world that players want to return to even after experiencing the story.<p>The game takes place in a fantasy world that also draws lightly on some steampunk elements. It features landscapes varying from coastal towns to hostile forests. As the story begins, the player, whose avatar is only ever addressed as "The Kid," is one of two people to successfully make it to the Bastion, a floating fortress built to be the last stronghold of the country Caelondia. The player's task is to collect "cores," which are magical crystals that power the Bastion. With the addition of each new core to the Monument in the center, the Bastion can send the player farther, allowing them to access more new levels.<p>According to Murray, the three key aspects of interactive storytelling are agency, immersion, and transformation. Of these, Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern describe agency as "the most fundamental," (The Game Design Reader, 650). Agency, according to Mateas and Stern, is "the feeling of empowerment that comes from being able to take actions in the world whose effects relate to the player's intention," (Reader, 649). In other words, it means the player can control the world in a satisfying and tangible way, and the most basic level of controlling the world is the game's controls.<p>Supergiant Games released "Bastion" on multiple platforms, including PC, tablet, and smartphone, each with a different control scheme, yet each manages to feel tight and reactive. Bastion is a top-down isometric hack-and-slash game and nearly all gameplay revolves around fighting enemies, so a deep and varied combat system is essential to meaningful play. Navigating the level is equally satisfying whether tapping the desired location, controlling movement with a virtual joystick, or pressing keys on a keyboard.<p>The combat is quick and visceral and, most importantly, each individual weapon has a real sense of weight. The first weapon the player receives is a giant mallet, dubbed the "Cael Hammer." It can be used while moving, though it slows movement during a swing, but it grants a bonus to damage if used while standing still. The effect of motion on damage combined with the time it takes to prepare for another swing gives the weapon a feel unlike that of any other the game offers. Then, just as the player adjusts to their new toy, the "Fang Repeater" falls from the sky. The repeater, with its rapid, ranged attack, lower damage, and affordance of motion, feels like the opposite of the mallet in every way, immediately introducing a decision-making element to the fight.<p>Beyond the weapons, the enemies themselves are varied, and can even be made to attack each other by a skilled enough hand. The effect of the player's presence is immediately visible as they either charge in headlong, prepare to strike, or fall back to attack from afar. When hit, their injured status is cleanly denoted by an unobtrusive health meter that circles around their feet. The health meters also serve to help the player determine enemy positions when the enemy is not on the ground, since the game's art style does not scale objects with distance. This subtle design choice helps reconcile the immersive world with the game's tactile combat, providing the player with knowledge of the enemies' states that their avatar does not have without distracting the player from the experience.<p>Aside from combat, the world itself responds to the player's presence. A cornerstone of the game's aesthetic is that the ground forms up around the player as they traverse the level. The player can clearly see where they have been by the path revealed by their presence, but has to experiment to find the way forward through the void, using the direction suggested by the existing path and sporadic pre-existing land masses as a guide. An incredible sense of agency is created when the world rises from the ground and falls from the sky with each step, with many pieces that can be destroyed just as quickly by the swing of a hammer in the search for hidden valuables. Furthermore, the player's role in driving the story forward also creates agency, working hand-in-hand with "Bastion"'s incredible sense of immersion.<p>Immersion, as defined by Mateas and Stern, is "the feeling of being present in another place and engaged in the action therein," (Reader, 649), which is to say that the player feels like they are somewhere that they are not, and that what they do there matters. "Bastion" approaches the task of immersive gameplay on multiple fronts, employing an engaging storyline, an otherworldly art style, and excellent sound design. The game's foremost means of drawing the player in is the gameplay which, as previously discussed, means the combat system. Because the weapons have such a physicality to them, the mind more readily accepts them as real than it would a hammer that feels like a dagger or a pistol that feels like a cannon. The ebb and flow of combat that grows from the properly balanced weapons and the varied enemies is immediately engaging.<p>The second means of immersion, and perhaps the most notable, is the setting. In this sense, the setting refers to the environment--the world, the sounds, the aesthetic. When the player first lands in the world (literally--he falls from the sky), upon getting up the path "forms up under his feet as if pointing the way" (Bastion, opening narration). The idea of a world coming together in reaction to one's presence is at the same time foreign yet understandable, leaving the player with an intuition as to the new world's mechanics without giving him a real-world reference to fall back on. This readjustment to a new universe with new natural laws is common in fantasy, across all storytelling mediums.<p>The third key element in the immersive experience is "Bastion"'s sound design. The game employs sound to add tone to the scenery, add feedback to the combat, and add depth to the story arc. Encouraging music plays as the player first sets off, sad music plays as the player finds Zulf, a survivor who believes he will never see another from his country, and the first song with lyrics plays as the player finds Zia, a singer from Zulf's country. There is even a very clear similarity in the style of Zia and Zulf's themes, complimenting their shared background in a country called "Ura." Meanwhile, the music surrounding the Caelondian characters, the player and Rucks (who is also the narrator), has it's own style. The game's sounds also serve to add another sense of reality to the weapons. The "Cael Hammer" makes an extremely satisfying thud on the downswing, adding to its sense of heaviness, and the "Fang Repeater" manages to sound as if it's made from wood and elastic, which contributes to its feeling of levity.<p>The fourth and final means of immersion is the storyline. In Supergiant Games' "Bastion," the player plays as "The Kid." At first, this initial namelessness allows the player to step into the character's shoes, and it is only later that the game reveals The Kid's backstory. This delayed exposition makes the player feel more like they are discovering themselves than someone else. Furthermore, the backstory and lore can be largely ignored. Much of the world's history is discovered by finding optional collectables scattered throughout the levels and engaging in optional conversations with Rucks, Zulf, and Zia. The Kid's backstory is even told in an optional level.<p>The game's storyline is compelling enough to drive the player to explore secondary paths and seek out more information, and on a second playthrough much of what is revealed through exploration can be identified as foreshadowing for the events and revelations to come. For example, while out collecting one of the cores, the player finds a hidebound journal that, upon being shown to Zia, is revealed to have belonged to her father. When the player shows the notebook to Zulf, Rucks narrates, "The scientific journal written in Zulf's native tongue. He learned so much from it. Too much." Then, after completing the next level and collecting the sixth and final core, the player returns to find Zulf gone and the Monument sabotaged, beginning the next stage of the game, in which the player must find six additional "shards" to repair the damage.<p>This added value of a second playthrough is an important aspect of Murray's concept of transformation. Mateas and Stern describe transformation as "[allowing] the player to transform themselves into someone else," "[offering] a multitude of variations on a theme," and "[taking] the player on a journey of personal transformation," (Reader, 649-650). "Bastion" grants the player an avatar, a journey, and enough variety to make that journey again and again. The avatar, as mentioned, is "The Kid." Through The Kid, the player gets to go on an adventure of world saving and self discovery by proxy.<p>As far as personal transformation, "Bastion" allows the player to define themselves as The Kid through two huge decisions. The first being whether, after Zulf betrays The Kid, Rucks, and Zia, to rescue Zulf from his own people, and the second being whether, once the Bastion has been restored to full power, whether to use that power to revert all of creation back to before the catastrophic event that drove them to the Bastion ("The Calamity"), or to use that power to fly onward to brighter days. Through these choices the player decides The Kid's capacity for forgiveness and his sense of hope in two fell swoops.<p>Perhaps "Bastion"'s most impressive branch of transformation is its variety. Playthrough after playthrough, the game stays fresh due to its combat and, most uniquely, its reactive narration. Bastion keeps encounters interesting by introducing new enemies steadily from beginning to end, while throwing new combinations of enemies and even new variations of old enemies at the player. The combat evolves as periodically a new weapon--only two of which, barring unusual circumstances, may be selected for each level at the Armory--is added to the player's arsenal. Furthermore, each weapon has three upgrades at the Forge that can dramatically change their play style, and depending on what weapons are selected there are over a dozen special abilities to choose, each useful in a different tight situation.<p>The player can achieve even deeper customization through the use of "spirits." At the Distillery, the player can select up to ten different drinks, each of which provide a statistical buff of some variety. At the Lost and Found the player can purchase items and upgrades missed in past levels, the Memorial offers challenges to be completed for extra money, and the Shrine allows the player to invoke different gods to increase the game's difficulty in exchange for experience and monetary bonuses. Finally, the game allows the player, as they progress, to choose the order in which they build these structures on the Bastion and unlock their abilities. This diegetic sense of progression--the restoration of the Bastion as opposed to "chapters" or "parts" like in many other games--also contributes to the game's immersive quality, giving the story variety while enhancing replayability.<p>A very special aspect of "Bastion" that drives the player to keep coming back is its reactive narration. Rucks, initially a faceless stranger and later a character and friend, narrates the game's action from beginning to end. When The Kid engages in conversation with Zulf or Zia, Rucks narrates the interaction in third person. When The Kid first receives his hammer, should the player choose to practice with it by breaking everything in sight, Rucks will say "Kid just rages for a while."<p>The quality of the Rucks' voice acting makes the player want to try new and sometimes strange things just to see if Rucks will comment. This includes new combinations of spirits ("A little squirt cider makes doomshine easier to swallow"), new weapon upgrades ("To master the musket, you gotta get rid of the recoil"), and new weapon pairings ("If there's anything that blade can't split open, a cannon oughta do it"). Rucks' voice follows the player from beginning to end, with "Proper story's supposed to start at the beginning. Ain't so simple with this one," all the way to, depending on the selected ending, "I'll see you in the next one."<p>Supergiant Games' "Bastion" is truly a triumph of meaningful play. It offers an emotional story and an immersive experience. It provides satisfying and cathartic combat and a beautiful world. It allows for extensive replayability and exploration. Any player searching for a wonderful and complete gaming experience need look no further than "Bastion."<p>Hold down the left mouse button and explore the screen with your cursor. Use the left and right arrow keys to navigate between pages. Use Alt-F4 or Cmd+Q to exit.